There are many active probabilistic programming frameworks in the Julia ecosystem (see [Related Work](related_work.md)) - the long term research goal of Jaynes is to identify _composable interfaces_ for allowing users to express static graphical models alongside dynamic sample-based models. This has previously been a difficult challenge - the representations which each class of probabilistic programming system utilizes is very different. Universal probabilistic programming systems have typically relied on sample-based inference, where the main representation is a structured form of an execution trace. In contrast, graphical model systems reason explicitly about distributions and thus require an explicit graph representation of how random variates depend on one another.

A priori, there is no reason why these representations can't be combined in some way. The difficulty lies in deciding how to switch between representations when a program is amenable to both, as well as how the different representations will communicate across inference interfaces. For example, consider performing belief propagation on a model which supports both discrete distributions and function call sites for probabilistic programs which required a sample-based tracing mechanism for interpretation. To enable inference routines to operate on this "call graph" style representation, we have to construct and reason about the representation separately from the runtime of each program.

---

To facilitate these research goals, Jaynes is designed as a type of compiler plugin. In contrast to existing frameworks, Jaynes does not require the use of specialized macros to denote where the modeling language begins and ends. The use of macros to denote a language barrier has a number of positive advantages from a user-facing perspective, but some disadvantages related to composability. As an opinion, I believe that a general framework for expressing probabilistic programs should mimic the philosophy of _differentiable programming_. The compiler plugin backend should prevent users from writing programs which are "not valid" (either as a static analysis or a runtime error) but should otherwise get out of the way of the user. Any macros present in the Jaynes library extend the core functionality or provide convenient access to code generation for use by a user - but are not required for modeling and inference.

Because Jaynes is a compiler plugin, it is highly configurable. The goal of the core package is to implement a set of "sensible defaults" for common use, while allowing the implementation of other DSLs, custom inference algorithms, custom representations, etc on top. In this philosophy, Jaynes follows a path first laid out by [Gen](https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/3314221.3314642)...with a few twists.

Bon appétit!
